[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
How would you like to
achieve greater equilibrium
and poise in your life?
When we're centered and
harnessing our inner resources
and maintaining
grace under pressure,
that's when we'll be able to
meet any challenges that life
gives us.
And in this episode,
we take a deeper dive
into the archetypes of
the chariot and strength.
Now, these archetypes
together are
about harnessing our
will and life force.
The chariot represents
the departure
of the hero off on his
grand adventure or mission,
while the strength
key represents
taming our instinctual
nature in order
to attain poise and
grace, even when
we feel pressured and stressed.
As the wheel now rotates
clockwise to keys 7 and 8,
we venture deeper into our
experience of the world
and our search to master
our physical lives.
But as we come to
key 7, the chariot,
we're now prepared and ready
to embark on our mission.
We're fully equipped with
all the foundational tools,
qualities, and lessons
gained from the first seven
archetypes.
We've learned about our role
in society, in relationships,
and we've gained
self-awareness, and also
how to use both our subconscious
and our conscious modes
of thoughts.
We're now entering into
the beginning stages
of seeking balance in
the world and society,
and coming to understand
the universal laws.
Now the alchemy begins.
Now, as we take our next
step on the hero's journey,
we come to the chariot.
Now, the chariot is the
embodiment of the hero.
He's the fool, or us, only
now more educated and prepared
for the mission.
Now, the chariot's
main functions
have to do with all matters
of achievement and success
in whatever it is we
set forth to accomplish.
The chariot is ruled
by the number 7,
and 7 is a very sensitive
and intuitive number.
It's a sacred number
that connects us
to the seven spiritual
dimensions, the seven
stages of alchemy, the seven
ancient planets, the seven
chakras, and so on, and
it deals with matters
of establishing
equilibrium at all levels,
leading to mastery,
poise, and victory.
And when out of
balance, it can become
sacrificial and delusional,
but in its very positive
expression, it's compassionate,
spiritual, and psychic.
Now, let's take a look at
the imagery of the chariot.
We see a crowned
and royal champion
who is at the helm
of his chariot, which
is drawn by two
sphinxes, and they are
ready to set off on a mission.
Now, at present,
they're at rest, still
in their final preparation
for this adventure.
And notice how the chariot
encloses the hero within it,
offering protection.
This idea of enclosure
and protection
is depicted in a number of
ways here within this key.
There's the wall of the city.
There's the chariot itself.
There's the armor of
the charioteer, and also
the castles, all of
which indicate enclosure.
Now, the chariot's shoulders
are accented by crescent moons,
showing that there is an
influence of the moon here,
and its cycles must be
understood and honored.
The moon especially influences
our emotions and our mood,
and it's represented by the
faces of comedy and tragedy
here within the crescent moons.
And the chariot teaches us that
the way to master our emotions
is to create a permanent
mood of equilibrium and peace
within, making this
like a daily mantra.
The chariot itself represents
the vehicle of manifestation,
and it has the shape of a cube,
which represents our soul.
The soul is the mediator
between the physical body
and our eternal
spirit, and the soul
surrounds the
consciousness and gives it
the ability to move around
and interact with this world.
It's the vehicle of incarnation.
Now, it represents all the
possibilities and experiences
that life in the
physical can offer us.
It's four-squared
structure symbolizes
stability and balance.
Now, in the alchemical
process, this chariot
is also what we call the
athanor, or the furnace,
which uses the fires
of alchemy to burn
and to drive the
alchemical process forward.
Now, the chariot is moved by
the power of two sphinxes.
These represent our senses,
through which we can
experience the four elements.
It's our five senses that
drive us to experience
the physical world.
They're our desire nature
on an emotional level,
and the sphinxes are also
black and white here,
like the two pillars
of polarity that we
see in the high priestess card.
The white one represents
force and expansion,
while the black one represents
form and limitation.
And we can think of them as
kind of being like the gas pedal
and the brakes of a vehicle.
We must learn to
harness both of them
to know when to apply which
mode of movement in order
to achieve balance and
safety in our drive.
When we work together
in harmony with these,
the sphinxes bring effortless
power to the chariot.
Notice also that
there's no reins.
That's because the charioteer
is the master of his own ship.
He steers with his mind,
and the power resides here
in consciousness alone.
It is by will alone that he
sets his chariot in motion.
Now, take a look,
also, at the emblem
on the front of the chariot.
This is an emblem of Shiva, with
an interlinked lingam and yoni.
So this shows that there
must be a perfect union
of masculine and feminine
forces that generate all things.
The masculine force
performs the mental magic,
while the feminine is
the magic of embodiment.
And this symbol is
set within a shield,
and above that is a
winged solar disk.
Now, the winged disk is a symbol
that was loved and beloved
by the ancient Egyptians.
It represents
freedom, liberation,
and spiritual transcendence.
Now, all together, this
is a fusion of Eastern
and Western metaphysics
showing unity and universality.
The chariot also embodies a
link between Heaven and Earth.
You see, above the
charioteer, a starry canopy,
which refers to the celestial
hierarchy of constellations.
Also, his belt
represents the zodiac,
indicating his
celestial purpose.
And these all reflect
in earthly action.
So then below, with the
black and white sphinxes,
that signifies our two natures.
Here we have above, the
celestial, and below,
the animal.
So we have animal and divine.
We have physical and spiritual.
We have mortal and immortal.
And this hints that
the secret wisdom
is attained by battling with
and overcoming our lower
nature, while
bringing our higher
spirit into the
physical world of form.
Now, the walled city
in the background
indicates the world
that he's leaving behind
in his quest for
self-actualization.
And another important
symbolism is
that the chariot is
on the other side
of the river from the city.
There's something known
as the other shore, which
is a metaphor for liberation
and being set free.
And this river is that
stream of consciousness
that originates in the
robe of the high priestess.
So his consciousness is
now free to grow and expand
after having successfully
completed his training
and preparation.
Now, the most essential
message of key 7
is that it represents what
we call the middle way, not
the extremes of right or left.
The charioteer's posture
is standing perfectly
aligned as the middle
pillar, square on.
Now, if you continue to study
the imagery of the chariot,
you will discover that he
sums up all the earlier keys.
He is their synthesis.
And above all
things, he represents
the triumph of the mind.
The charioteer represents
our inner self,
and this archetype
brings us opportunities
for self-discipline and control.
But so often, we're trying to
control everything by our lower
ego, and when we're allowing
our ego to direct our will,
things don't go so well.
The two sphinxes will pull
in different directions
when the ego is in charge.
To truly be the
captain of our ship,
we must surrender
the ego's control
and become receptive to
the eternal will of spirit.
The more we prepare our
soul to be a receptive
vehicle for spirit, the
more the eternal will
can express through us.
As Paul Foster Case
puts it, he says,
"Complete receptivity
is the secret
of the most powerful
manifestations of will."
And Eliphas Levi puts it that
all magic is in the will.
In ancient Greek mythology,
the archetype of the chariot
was related to Apollo,
the son of Zeus,
who drove the sun across
the sky in his chariot.
The sun in this case is
a symbol of our spirit,
and its vehicle of
transport is our soul.
But what are some other
correspondences of the chariot?
Well, his secret name,
or esoteric title,
is the child of the
powers of the waters,
and the lord of the
triumph of light.
His element is
water, which relates
to his astrological
sign of cancer,
which is an active water
sign in the zodiac.
The highest expression
of cancer is
a supporting, nurturing depth
with very balanced emotions.
Cancer is the fourth
sine of the zodiac,
and it's very intuitive,
sensitive, psychic,
and receptive.
But when confronted,
the cancer normally
will react from emotion,
rather than intellect,
and this can cause
difficulties if they're not
in control of their behavior.
In astrology, cancer rules the
fourth house of home and family
and security, and
it's also ruled
by the moon, which is
why we see the moon so
prominent in the chariot card.
Cancer is thus very protective
of their home and their family.
Now, some other key
words associated here
with the chariot are
enlightenment, discipline,
motivation, and being able
to overcome obstacles.
Now, those strengths
are the balanced,
or the pure expression
of the chariot.
But when they get out of balance
with too much or too little,
they become distorted,
and they form
weaknesses, or shadow aspects.
So some of those
weaknesses that we
need to watch out for that
might be revealed within us
are arrogance, having an
inflated ego, deterioration,
elusiveness, instability,
avarice and greed, cruelty.
Another way the chariot's
shadow might show up in us
is when we engage in battles
that really have no purpose,
or that can't be won.
And we need to
really discern, which
battles are worth fighting?
Another thing we
have to watch out for
is a lack of
self-control, or relying
on some form of self-denial
as a way of exercising
control over ourselves.
Now, as we begin to recognize
which aspects of the shadow
are showing up within
us, that's when
we can begin the work
of transforming it.
And as we do that
spiritual alchemy
of transforming the
shadow into light,
it reveals the gifts that
were hidden within the shadow.
So as we bring the shadow
to light with the chariot,
it helps us to
solve problems using
various skills that have been
gained from past experience.
It helps us with having
greater compassion,
and considering different
issues from another person's
perspective.
And then it awakens
the hero in us.
Think of times when you've
been or encountered the chariot
in your life.
Perhaps you've
experienced the capacity
to create movement and change
with a sense of balanced will
and use of mind.
Chariot people are natural
motivators and catalysts.
So who's helped
motivate you, or been
a catalyst for positive change
and empowerment in your life?
Whether it was a role
model when you were a kid,
or perhaps someone you look
up to now who you maybe
aspire to be, these people have
been the chariot in your life.
Or perhaps you've been the
chariot, or the role model
and catalyst for others.
The more you recognize
the chariot in your life
here and now, the
more it will also
connect you with one
of your parallel lives,
where the chariot is
the dominant archetype.
What might our parallel life
be like under the archetype
of the chariot?
Well, this archetype is often
the hero of our epic adventure
movies and books.
Recall the stories of the
Knights of the Round Table
and their quest
for the Holy Grail,
or you could think of Luke
Skywalker and the moment
when he's needing
to use the force
and be completely
receptive to that will,
like when he's flying
his fighter jet to drop
that bomb in a weak
spot of the Death Star,
or you could think
of a chivalrous
Knights Templar on a journey
to the Holy Land protecting
pilgrims along the way.
But as for more
contemporary examples,
we might think of the astronauts
who were some of the first
to explore outer space,
or any kind of explorer,
for that matter, who
seeks adventure and glory.
Other careers that work
with this chariot energy
might be as a motivational
speaker, a coach, or a change
agent hired to help
transform a company--
any kind of catalyst for change.
Now, once the furnace
of the chariot
is prepared and ready
to begin the great work,
the next step is to
light the fire within it.
This brings us to
the strength key,
and the first stage of
the alchemical process
known as calcination.
This archetype represents
the vital essence
of the alchemical
fire in so many ways.
Now, fire is an energy that must
be respected and controlled,
otherwise it burns
us or our work.
So controlling this
energy is about applying
the right mix of form and
force, severity and love,
to bridge the polarities.
But like an acrobat who's
balancing on a tightrope,
we must rhythmically
and continuously
readjust to maintain balance.
And the symbolism
of the strength key
suggests that force should
always be mitigated by love.
Perfect order and
perfect discipline
combine into perfect control.
Now, strength is
ruled by the number 8,
so let's explore the numerology
of that number for a moment.
The first thing to notice about
the number 8 is its shape.
It's the perfect reflection
of above and below.
Now, when we turn
this on its side,
it's also the same as
the symbol for infinity,
and this symbol relates to the
eternal rhythms of vibration
and the laws of harmony.
Now, in the middle, where
the two loops cross over,
we have the balance
point between polarities,
or the junction between
Heaven and Earth.
Let's now explore the imagery
and symbolism of the strength
card.
We see a woman in
a gown of white
who gently holds
the head of a lion
and appears to be taming him.
The scenery is out in
nature, with the mountain
of the great work
in the background,
and the lion has become
her faithful companion.
This lion is a symbol
of Leo, as well as
the fiery solar energy from
which we draw our life force.
The lion is a masculine energy,
while the woman is obviously
a feminine energy,
and the two are
interconnected by
a wreath that forms
an infinity loop between them.
Now, the strength
key represents a kind
of marriage between the
feminine and the masculine.
The wreath of roses joins
them in a complete and happy
mixture.
It's a very harmonious affair.
Each requires something
of the other inside of it
for this harmony
to be established.
It's very similar to the concept
captured within the yin-yang.
Each contains the seed of
the opposite within it.
Now, in alchemy, the lion
has very special meaning.
If you ever see a
green lion in alchemy,
it's about the raw
energy of nature
before we've applied
our will to it.
Whereas a red lion
represents the natural forces
under perfect control after
many changes have already
taken place through
the alchemical process,
an old lion represents
the purified consciousness
that is achieved
through the great work.
And here, the gold lion
represents solar energy
and the vital life force, or
Kundalini energy, within us.
The powers of the lion are
now able to be directed
by consciousness through a
harmonious partnership that's
been established.
Strength also shares
very similar symbols
as the magician key.
He also wears a
white robe of purity,
and he has the same infinity
symbol over his head.
And the main color
for both of these keys
is yellow, representing
that element of air,
as well as a harmony and
balance within nature.
The magician also points
to a garden of flowers,
and now we see that
this garden grows
on the wreath of strength.
And the garden represents
a sense of organic growth,
as well as the roses,
which represent desire.
Both the magician card
and the strength card
are very calm in
their expressions,
and they're acting as
transparent conduits for higher
will to flow through them.
This is how they
accomplish what they do.
But as a feminine,
strength represents
the subconscious side of us.
Clearly, she's taking in what
the magician or consciousness
has actively focused
on, and she's now
embodying it innately.
We've reached a place where
our subconscious is more
aligned with our conscious
pursuit of personal evolution.
Now, strength also
represents befriending
an ally or a
companion on the path,
but we must show our
strength in order
to win this being's
loyalty and friendship.
The woman handles the
lion like a beloved pet,
and this shows that we
should love and appreciate
all parts of ourselves,
even our baser instincts.
And this key shows that we
should be kind and loving,
yet firm with ourselves.
There's no need to beat
ourselves up about things.
Taming our ego is
like taming a pet.
We need consistency, clarity,
positive reinforcement, reward,
love, and boundaries.
And for us, a regular
practice of meditation
brings this greater
mastery and self-awareness.
What is strength
trying to show us?
This archetype stimulates
the development
of true spiritual
strength and grace.
It's about facing and overcoming
our doubts and fears, which
can rise up from the
ego and lower self,
and it teaches us to overcome
any sort of indecision,
and to move forward
with confidence.
But consciously
choosing to do this
from the viewpoint of
a positive, empowered,
and meaningful
outlook, and then we
can program our
subconscious pattern
in a way that truly serves
us to achieve that mastery.
So let's go through some other
correspondences of the strength
card.
The esoteric title, or the
secret name of strength,
is the daughter of
the flaming sword,
and the leader of the lion.
The element here is what we
call the fixed fire, which
relates to Leo, the
astrological correspondence.
Strength is obviously
ruled by Leo,
with the lion being a
key part of this card,
and Leo's attributes are
dynamism and courage,
creative power, and strength.
Now, the sun passes
through Leo, which
is the fifth sign
of the zodiac, when
it's at the height
of the summertime,
and it's therefore a fixed fire
sign, and is ruled by the sun.
The sun is happy,
vibrant, and romantic.
Now, the symbol for Leo
also represents a serpent,
and since Leo
governs the spine, it
relates to Kundalini
energy that moves
through the spinal channels
in the practice of yoga.
Now, this Kundalini is what
lights that fire in our body's
own alchemical oven.
So in astrology, Leo
rules the fifth house
of pleasure, creativity,
and self-expression,
and it's ruled by the sun.
And very similar to the
moon, in ancient astrology,
the sun was assigned the
rulership of this sign,
and it's only ruling over Leo--
very much like how the moon
rules only over cancer.
Now, the ancient
Egyptian goddess
that was associated with
this key of strength
and the sign of Leo
is none other than
the lion-headed
goddess Sekhmet, one
of the oldest-known
Egyptian deities.
She's a warrior goddess, as
well as a goddess of healing,
and she's a protector of Ra
during his nightly journey
through the underworld.
She can be fierce, and she
can also be benevolent.
Her name is derived
from "sekhem,"
which means power, or
might, and her legends
display both the shadow and
the light of the strength key.
Now, other key words
associated with strength
include courage, power, might,
fortitude, force, vitality,
passion, and love.
Some of the
strengths and virtues
that she helps us to achieve
are greater willpower,
self-reliance and
self-restraint, proper limits,
and peacekeeping abilities,
the righting of wrongs,
holding a state of
serenity, inner alchemy,
facing reality,
defending the weak,
and having grace under pressure.
Now, these strengths
are the balanced,
or the pure expressions
of this key.
But when we go too much
or too little of these,
they become weaknesses
and shadow aspects.
So some of the weaknesses
and the vices of strength
include being wavering, being
subservient, getting too much
into fear, being selfish,
having an attitude
of being burned out, and
taking advantage of others.
Some of the ways that the
weaknesses of strength
express themselves
through its shadow side
include a lack of
courage or integrity,
having insecurities, and
destructive aggression.
It could also come
in the form of rage,
or possibly an
expressed abusiveness,
a lack of compassion,
and being more selfish,
as well as having
violent tendencies.
So we must be
careful to not become
a victim of our own untamed
nature because of fear.
That's the same thing as
fearing our own power,
and therefore not learning
how to control our impulses.
When we can recognize
and acknowledge
how the shadow side of strength
might be showing up in us,
that's when we can start
to transform it and do
the spiritual alchemy of
changing the shadow into light.
And some of the ways to bring
our shadow into the light
is to find a way to make our
animal nature a more peaceful
companion to us,
making peace also
with that dark
side of our nature,
and extending compassion
to that part of ourselves
and others when we see it.
Having an inner
strength allows you
to heal yourself and others.
Now, some of the
other benefits that
can be gained by
working with strength
is that it helps
us to strengthen
our use of our own
life force energy,
and it gives us an opportunity
to burn away the dross,
or the things that
don't serve us.
It helps us stimulate a
desire to overcome material
and spiritual barriers.
Think of times when you've
either been or encountered
someone with strength in
your life, someone who's
able to handle stress
and pressure with grace
and equanimity, who faces their
fears and their doubts head on,
and they learn to conquer them.
Now, as children,
we're often fearless,
and our creative
imagination runs freely.
But inevitably, we have some
accidents, we make mistakes,
and we get burned by the fire.
And this usually
teaches us that we
have to have a healthy
respect for the fire
and be more cautious.
Now, if we handle these
learning experiences with grace,
then they inform our future
choices in a good way.
But if we don't
handle them well,
then we develop fears,
insecurities, and attachments
that weaken us later in life.
The strength archetype wants
us to now overcome those fears,
while learning the lessons
from our experiences.
And that requires healing,
and healing requires
self-love and acceptance.
Now, any time we're
applying the discipline that
is needed to
control our impulses
and to overcome our
fears, we're also
drawing upon the
power of strength.
And any time we're able
to maintain our composure
and stay centered in the face
of someone else trying to attack
us, that too is strength.
What might our parallel life
be like under the archetype
of strength?
Well, one example of
strength manifesting
is through overcoming a
direct challenge or test.
We can think of something like
Hercules wrestling the lion,
or Daniel when he was thrown
into the den of lions.
In modern day life,
we can also look
to people who have really
mastered themselves
to be at the top of their game.
Examples could include Olympic
and pro athletes, performing
artists, leaders who tend to be
really in the spotlight a lot,
and it would be a life
where they shine on stage,
or they really get to express
their passion and creativity.
The people of strength have
serious dedication, discipline,
and creative vision.
By working with strength
and invoking its archetypes
and energies into
your life, you too
can master the lion within you.
Join me again as
we explore further
into the 22 archetypes
of tarot and how
they can help us to make our
big shift in consciousness.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for exploring
the mysteries of tarot
and our
multi-dimensionality with me
in this episode of
"Mystery Teachings."